at the end of the day
what is in your mind when you set out to
do a task drastically alters how
successful you are so today what i'd
like to do is uh
um share a couple of thoughts with y'all
the first is on a very high level
how i think about performance
so having worked um having consulted at
startups having worked with c-suite
executives having worked at investment
banks having worked at major tech
companies
uh in terms of like optimizing their
performance working with like content
creators
um you know physical athletes like nfl
players football players things like
that
and also working with like students and
and you know medical students things
like that
what i've come to realize and now having
worked uh very intensively with an
esports team we've i've done work with
esports for the last three years
um but this was is definitely like the
most intensive engagement
what i've kind of realized is that like
it boils down to four things and what i
like to do today is share
what i would call the four pillars of
performance
and this is where if we kind of take a
step back like it kind of goes back to
what i was saying earlier which is that
at the end of the day you can be an
esports professional a physical athlete
a student
um a parent
uh or like a ceo and at the end of the
day
you're human right so the common element
is not the industry it's the human
so what can we understand from a human
perspective from a personal perspective
that will translate into success in any
of those fields
and too often i think what we have is
like we have like industry specific
um
results like we have industry specific
like performance improvement right so
for example there will be someone who
specializes as a sports psychologist and
they have a lot to offer don't get me
wrong you'll have someone who
specializes in like you know physical
sports you'll have you know people who
specialize as like consultants for
you know investment banks or like
consultants for like it solutions or
things like that so we'll have a lot of
like industry specific support which is
wonderful and it's very effective don't
get me wrong
but i think what's actually missing is
some
somewhat more of like
understanding on a fundamental level
what works in all of the industries
right and in my experience like the
common element is the fact that they're
humans and if we look at humans sure
humans can be quite different
but if we look at humans what we see at
the end of the day is that the
similarity between two humans is greater
than the difference we all have one
brain two eyes you know for the most
part two nostrils a mouth one heart two
lungs two kidneys one stomach
and so there's a lot of similarities
between humans our brains are all wired
a certain way like we all have occipital
cortices we all have frontal lobes
and so there are common elements of
performance which i think transcend any
industry and the other thing that i'm
gonna so i'd like to share with you all
kind of my
idea of like the four pillars of
performance
um
so
the other thing to kind of think a
little bit about and and why i sort of
divided it into four pillars is to
understand that in my experience when
people are looking to improve
they tend to focus on one of these
things and neglect the others so what
i'm going to do is share with you all
what i think the four pillars of
performance are and then also go through
two examples one is a student and one is
a programmer of like how
how to apply like these ideas
and in my experience what tends to
happen is that people will get like
hyper focused on one of the four pillars
and they won't and they'll keep on
trying to improve that but that there's
like a diagnostic problem so people will
like diagnose themselves as like they'll
only look at one of these four things
and they'll keep on trying to improve
that and then they end up getting
frustrated because they don't think
about these other dimensions
so um you know
here are the four things that i think it
essentially comes down to the first is
preparation so this is like what you do
that sets you up in a long-term sense
for performance on a given day so this
can be like studying for example like
for a test right how you prepare for the
test will result in performance for the
test
as a programmer this could have a lot to
do with for example
where you went to school if you went to
school what kind of certifications you
have what your work experience is so
like did you work at this company for
this amount of time or this company for
this amount of time and i know like a
lot of y'all are thinking like oh isn't
isn't my performance on a test like
doesn't it depend on how much i study
like isn't that because that's what we
sort of think of right which is exactly
the point which is there's way more to
it than just how you study so
preparation is definitely a huge part
and generally speaking when we think
about performance i think preparation is
the first and unfortunately oftentimes
the only thing that people think about
so then what happens is when they do
poorly on the test like people get
frustrated they say like oh i need to
study more i need to study more i need
to study more
the second pillar is going to be
adaptation so this is where when i look
at people who are successful across
different fields what i see is that
there's like a big difference between
like the the winners and the losers
and it's that the winners know how to
adapt and the losers sort of don't so
i'll give you guys kind of a quick
example of this
so as a student you know if i like do
poorly on a math test
what a lot of people will do is like
conclude and they'll say like i'm not
good at math and they'll sort of like
determine some sense of identity around
poor performance the tricky thing there
is that sense of identity of i'm not
good at math or i'm not a math person or
um you know something like that like i
can't cook is a good example another
thing that i i hear you know a lot
people say like oh like i just can't
cook like it's not something that i'm
good at so when people will make
essentially identity determinations
based on performance
they stop adapting right so once you say
like i can't cook
there's nothing you can do about that
like if you say i'm bad at math or
um you know if some people will also
like in the dating world they'll say
like i'm ugly so that's just gg right
it's like over like i can't do anything
about it and so there's a fundamental
lack of adaptation and if you look at
the difference between some you know you
can have two people who are ugly but the
difference between one who winds up in a
healthy relationship and one who stays
alone is not the ugliness because that's
a i mean ugly people are in
relationships all the time i'm not
trying to be mean but i'm just sort of
stepping meeting them where they're at
and sort of assuming that that that's an
accurate physical characterization what
i'm saying is that there there's you
know you can take any kind of identifier
of the self like ugliness or i'm stupid
or i'm bad at math and what you'll find
is that like of all of the people who at
one point identified as being bad at
math some of them will actually be very
successful in fields that require math
right
and the big difference is their capacity
to adapt
um
so someone's saying i'm low iq so here's
what i'll tell you i've worked at a lot
of
startups and places where there are very
stupid people at the top and they can
still be really really successful right
so like for example leadership is a good
example where you don't need to be smart
you just need to be good at managing
people who are smart
right so you can
that doesn't need to hold you back
i'm low iq is also a prime example of
exactly the kind of thinking that i'm
talking about
so people who don't have an adaptive
mindset will label themselves with
something that is unchangeable they'll
say i'm ugly i have a low iq it's like a
thing that is like fixed right and so
then it's like you're screwed like i'm
just bad at dota it's like gg game over
there's nothing you can do about it so
that dooms you to like low performance
once you start thinking about it that
way so this is exactly why adaptability
is a huge part of this right it's the
ability to adaptation is not about like
changing who you are it's about
accounting for who you are and not
letting that get in the way of your
performance
so the third pillar that we're going to
talk about is communication so i think
irrespective of what field you're in or
i i guess there are a few cases where
this isn't true but i'd say for like you
know 99 of people that communication is
a skill that transcends any industry
and that what i've seen is that people
who perform well in a particular
field
are like tend to be good communicators
so you can have two doctors for example
who have comparable iqs comparable test
scores and comparable training
and there's a big difference in how well
they do in the workplace and if you've
worked in medicine in in any way shape
or form you recognize you'll know this
that like the doctors who get along with
other people are the ones that are going
to have like like have a better time and
do a better job so there are some
doctors for example that are very
arrogant
and they can still rise in positions of
power but like if they're the more
arrogant they are and the worse they are
at communicating like the more abusive
they are to their underlings and their
nursing staff
like the worse they end up doing and
that you know generally speaking the
best people in the hospital are the ones
that like you can communicate with so
you know if there's some doctor
that you're consulting and they're like
a pain to work with then like you're not
going to want to work with them and then
like there's a part of your mind that's
going to be thinking about that and
they're going to be like mean to you and
so like it doesn't and the patient is
the one who suffers
and i've worked with some doctors that
are just excellent communicators and
like they're by virtue of their
communication skills their actual output
improves and so this is also true
whether you're looking at c-suite
executives or
students even and we'll kind of go into
a lot of examples for students and even
programmers this is this is actually
really really important for programmers
especially because there's this idea
that like programmers like don't
communicate right like we're all about
sitting in front of our computer screens
and typing things out whereas what i've
seen when i work with clients who work
like you know work at places like google
and amazon and microsoft and stuff like
that is that the the programmers that
are very good at communicating like if
you guys have worked with good product
uh you know project managers for example
or um like a product dev team that
communication is like absolutely vital
to a good product
uh there's also i forget whose law it is
but you know there's a law that says
that the
number of programmers that you have
working on a project is inversely
correlated with the speed of the project
so if i have five programmers that it's
gonna take
one year for them to build a product and
i add five more people to the project it
actually the time doesn't reduce it
actually increases to like two years
so this is kind of a it's sort of a meme
but i think there's actually a lot of
reality to this and i think essentially
what it comes down to is like
communication
so um our third pillar is gonna be good
communication and if you're good at
communicating you're going to like do
better no matter what field you're in
there are a couple of exceptions to this
i imagine like you know i've heard for
example that like enya who's you know
makes music she's like very isolative
i've never talked to her these are all
rumors i don't know if this is true but
i imagine that there are some creative
pursuits and some examples of like you
know authors that like historically will
like go into the woods and like hang out
in a cabin for a while um and and
they'll kind of be isolated and maybe
that supports creative output maybe they
don't need to communicate much but
generally speaking i'd say 99 of that of
people that i've worked with need to be
good communicators
the last thing and i know it's kind of
weird that i say this for last is
mindset
so at the end of the day what is in your
mind when you set out to do a task
drastically alters how successful you
are
so um
you know i'll just give you guys kind of
an example from from
my experience so like most of what we do
here at healthy gamer is mindset so
we'll kind of review some reddit posts
and stuff like that you guys we kind of
like this is our bread and butter but i
think uh
you know even when i play a dota game
like there's like a mindset that you can
have of going in so a lot of people will
say that if you want to win
in in like you know climb and dota or
like league of legends the first thing
you should do is like mute all other
players right
and so i think that that sort of makes
sense in some ways
but in my experience actually like
trying to communicate with people and i
know i'm sort of talking about
communication actually works pretty well
if you get good at it right but in the
reason i bring it up in terms of mindset
is like if you go into the game of dota
with the assumption that all
communication is bad
then it's going to sort of create a
situation where like communication is
unsuccessful
so mindset is incredibly important if
you go into a game of dota thinking like
oh i can actually try to communicate
with my teammates and i know what all
y'all are saying y'all are saying lol
i've tried that it doesn't work gg noob
you can't communicate with these animals
and and i think that that mindset is
actually like destroying your ability to
communicate so there's overwhelming
research for example that there's this
thing called the placebo effect and what
the placebo effect is it's really
bizarre but if a human being thinks
that something can work it actually
objectively increases their likelihood
of it working now there may be some
interesting example uh exceptions to
that so for example like maybe in
gambling like it doesn't really matter
what you think i don't know i'm not
really sure
but in most industries and definitely in
like scientific studies like we know
that giving someone the same medication
the results of that medication or the
effect of that medication is going to be
altered by the mindset of the person
and so
these are kind of our four pillars of
performance and now having worked with a
bunch of industries i think it basically
comes down to these four things so
preparation adaptation communication and
mindset
so the next thing that we're going to do
is go over two examples so we're going
to run through the case of a student in
the case of a programmer and we're going
to kind of talk a little bit about how
each of these things impacts these two
people's lives
so i i picked these two examples because
these are um you know examples of people
that i've worked with like a lot of
people in these industries so i feel
pretty confident about what i'm about to
share with y'all
so the first thing to understand is that
generally speaking like i said people
have a diagnostic problem so most people
who struggle with something will
look for solutions not look for problems
and i know that sounds kind of weird but
if i'm if i'm failing math right i'm not
going to google
how do i figure out why i'm failing at
math what i'm gonna google is how do i
succeed at math how do i get better at
math so the first thing that we have to
understand which i think is a huge like
societal problem in terms of thinking is
that we jump straight to treatments
without understanding diagnosis because
like if you if you if you're bad at math
and then you kind of say how do i study
better like the problem may not be
studying right like there could be all
kinds of other interventions that you
have which will allow you to succeed at
math that have nothing to do with
studying maybe studying isn't the
problem
so let's kind of talk about prep because
that's where studying is so
you know there are some efficient ways
of studying and that like you know if
you prepare appropriately like if your
preparation is good it will lead to a
better result this may be super simple
when it comes to studying but like
basically the more you study you know at
a very high level the more you study the
more likely you are to succeed
so
um
you know the kind of preparation that
you do is going to be also important so
like this is where okay so let's just
say on a high level the more you study
the better you do
but this is where it's important to
remember that preparation is not just
about like brute forcing it right so um
one of the big theories that i have in
in
in esports for example
is that mindlessly grinding pubs does
not make you better
so in in the same way i think mindlessly
studying does not make you better so if
practice was
is all it would take to improve then we
should see a clear correlation between
the number of games played
and
your skill at a particular game but we
know if you guys have played valorent or
league of legends or or you know dota or
anything you know that there are people
out there who have played 10 000 games
who are lower ranked than people who
have played 1000 games and so if we kind
of think about it how the hell does that
actually work right it's a very very
eye-opening revelation
that brute practice does not equal
results
and so a lot of times what we'll do is
like if i if i do poorly on a test what
am i going to say to myself oh i did
poorly because i didn't study enough
like i studied two hours a day and i
should have studied four hours a day so
we default to making preparation one
dimensional and brute forcing it
so there's been a lot of research on
deliberate practice right which is a
mindful or intentional practice so back
when i was tutoring people in the mcat
which is the medical college admissions
test it's the standardized test that you
have to take to get into medical school
i had a big revelation which was like
you can take a bunch of practice tests
and up to a point it will improve your
score but then what i noticed is that
some people would top out essentially
and that despite taking more and more
practice tests
their scores were not improving and then
what i kind of realized is that like oh
this is kind of interesting because
they may study more so like they may do
poorly in a particular subject so
they'll go and like read the chapter
again but that doesn't actually improve
their performance and essentially what
these people need to do is sit down and
this is essentially what i you know what
i did myself and what i taught other
people to do
is like look at the you know why did you
get the questions that you got right
right and why did you get the questions
that you got wrong wrong right what is
the reason
for the question you got this question
right and the question you got this
other question wrong so as a student a
lot of times what i find people will do
is just like increase their studying
time or they default to increasing their
studying time but actually being a
little bit more thoughtful about the way
that you study can actually be very very
helpful and actually lead to an
improvement in your test scores
so other examples of like optimization
like this so these are examples that i
would put into preparation are memory
like taking advantage of memory
consolidation so memory consolidation is
op
so a lot of people for example will
cram the night before the test or what
they'll do is like have these marathon
study sessions of like eight hours at a
stretch right whereas like when i was in
medical school what i would do is
basically study for two hours a day and
then like take advantage of memory
consolidation by taking a nap in the
afternoon so i would have uh you know
colleagues who would like like wake up
at 8 a.m and they'd like study from 8
a.m to 8 p.m because the more hours you
study the better you're gonna do and
what i tended to find is that i'd study
for two hours a day i'd take a nap and
then i'd wake up and i'd like chill a
little bit i'd studied for a couple more
hours maybe
um and when preparing for a test but on
average i only studied for two hours a
day and those like that those two hours
were like
ideal studying kind of systems and so as
you ideal ideally study like you
actually don't need to study more you
can study less and still get a good
grade so i think there's a lot of
sophistication and you can take
advantage of a lot of physiology and
neuroscience and psychology to improve
your
actual preparation
so other good examples of this is like
when i work with traders for example
like i'll sometimes get um you know
consulted by a group of traders
and what they will they'll all do their
kind of research and stuff but like
doing research on your own and doing
like 10 hours of research may or 10
hours versus 20 hours of research you
may not get a whole lot out of 20 hours
of research and what i actually found
when i worked with like day traders and
and things like that is that
um for example spending five hours
trading and one hour discussing what
you've learned with your colleagues
leads to an improvement of performance
over six hours of just doing research
right so there's some things that you
can do to optimize your preparation
beyond brute force
so that's the preparation category so we
talked a little bit about study habits
um
and so what you know the key thing here
once again is like when people think
like oh i just need to study more that
may not be correct you may actually be
studying more you may be studying enough
it's just the nature of your studying
may not be like optimal in some ways or
it's not even about optimal it may
actually be like horribly deficient in
some ways and another good example of
this is that a lot of students when they
study they'll just passively read
instead of like taking notes
and even their notes will be like very
passive so what i recommend to students
who want to to learn actually is to like
you know read let's say a chapter and
then sit down with a blank piece of
paper and write out what you understood
about the chapter because this is the
key thing that people don't understand
about like a test
so the skill that you need for a test is
information recall it's not like
information going in so there's actually
like a difference between recalling
stuff that's implanted and like putting
stuff in so it's actually more efficient
to instead of read a chapter twice to
read it once and then spend time
actually trying to recall it so then
what you're actually doing is like
that's training the skill of information
recall
and then when you try to recall and you
try to write down like all the key
concepts then when you go back to the
chapter at hand and you kind of like
look at and then then what you do is
you're like very focused right because
you're gonna say okay the second time i
read the chapter i'm gonna see what did
i miss and what did i get okay i got
that i got that oh i missed this
and then you don't jot it down there oh
i missed this i missed this i missed
this okay let me close the book let me
take a brand new sheet of paper and
let's see if i can put everything down
and so you're actually practicing
exactly what you're going to need to do
during the test and so when people start
to study in a situation like that it
improves their preparation and their
grades go up
the second
thing that we're going to talk about is
adaptation
so for students
like i was saying a lot of people will
make and
will claim a particular identity
around something like i'm bad at math or
i'm just not good at studying or these
kinds of things and so what i want y'all
to understand this is really important
is that there's a big difference between
successful people and non-successful
people and that big difference
essentially has to do with like what
they do when they fail so for
unsuccessful people what they tend to do
is
they'll say like i am a failure or
they'll make some attribute of their
identity instead of adapting so instead
of concluding that i'm bad at math the
question that you should ask yourself is
what can i do to get better at math what
can i do to get a better grade here
right and that's it's like it's such a
huge problem not only within our
community but within society as a whole
you can ask people like all the time and
they'll make like all these kinds of
interesting statements about themselves
that define who they are oh i'm just not
good at relationships sorry
oh i'm sorry that's just the way that i
am like if you can't like you know i'm
just someone who sometimes loses my cool
you know yeah like i just like sometimes
when i get drunk i do stupid things
sorry
and so these are people who when faced
with failure don't ask themselves the
question how can i actually be better at
this there's a complete lack of
adaptation and so as a student if you do
poorly in a class
it sort of doesn't matter whether you
did good or you did poorly the main
question that you need to ask yourself
is how can i do better right what can i
do differently
and so when i work with top tier esports
teams
and you all will see this if you like if
you you know watch tournaments it's like
some teams will be one-trick ponies and
then like they can get like halfway
through the tournament but they can't
make it to like you know
they'll come in with like a very clear
strategy that they practiced and drilled
a ton but it's the teams that are that
are able to adapt that are the ones that
consistently go the mo you know the the
long distance
and that's also true in life like you
can look at people who will get
hamstrung by a particular thing it's
like if i just say that i'm bad at math
and i'm good at these other subjects and
i've just got like one c on my
transcript that's going to tank my gpa
and decrease my chances of getting into
like medical school or whatever
it's the students who are able to ask
themselves the question what can i do
differently how can i get better at this
how can i adapt to this situation even
if i am bad at math even if you accept
that as true what can i do about it
those are the ones who end up succeeding
so if you're a student
and you have these like defined
qualities of yourself about yourself
like i am bad at this or i'm good at
this i'm just not a morning person there
may be some truth to that you may not
have quite the gift of mathematics that
someone else has you may have a
circadian rhythm that's a little bit
harder to control than other people
but that's not the important thing the
important thing is how can you adapt to
that circumstance okay so if i'm not a
morning person how do i need to adjust
to make sure that i i can perform well
on a test that's like scheduled for 8 am
right you have to ask yourself that
question and then that's going to be the
first step to like actually figuring it
out
so the next thing is communication so
this is where i hate to break it to you
but like students that communicate
amongst each other and are good at
communication tend to do better than
ones that are bad at communication so
i'll give you guys just a couple of
examples so like study groups are really
good ways to like anchor you to like
forcing you to study
and and so what we find is that
generally speaking people who form study
groups tend to outperform people who
don't
and so a big part of forming a study
group is like you know because it kind
of forces you to study you show up other
people show up things like that so it
kind of helps with the issues of
procrastination and motivation and stuff
like that but if you really look at it
the formation of a study group really
comes down to communication so one
person usually organizes it other people
are like communicative enough to
um you know kind of like show up and let
they'll be like yeah i'll be there or
whatever and then there's a lot of like
informal communication that happens some
people talk to each other in class and
things like that
and as students start to communicate
better amongst each other it also gives
them like particular advantages so like
students that are socially well plugged
in and have a study group that they show
up to on a regular basis if you're sick
or you need notes
like you're much more likely to get them
if you need help or you're struggling
with something and you ask for help
which by the way is communication you're
much more likely to like get it right
whereas you'll have other students who
are not very good at communication and
so if something bad happens if rng
screws them by getting sick then their
recovery is like way harder than the
student who's the good
communicator the other thing that's
absolutely op is that students who are
good at communicating will also
communicate with their tas professors
and that is a huge advantage so when i'm
writing someone a letter of
recommendation
it's the communication that the student
has had with me that ultimately
determines like how good the letter that
i write is right so like writing a good
letter of recommendation as someone who
writes them is all about knowing the
person right so like i can have two
people like if i if i'm teaching a class
and they both get a's it's even gotten
to the point where if someone gets a an
a in my class like i won't even write
them a letter of recommendation if i
don't know who they are i'll tell them
hey i don't know who you are like i can
all i can really say about you is that
you got an a in my class
i can't really say much
so what i've really found and i don't
know if you guys have known this but
like if if you're if your professor like
knows who you are and you communicate
with them they're also much more likely
to give you slack and this is where you
can say that that's unfair and i'm not
saying it is unfair but unfortunately
it's like human
and we as like social animals tend to um
we tend to value like communication and
personal relationships so this is also
where like networking comes in and so
we'll talk about that for programmers
but
um you know communication is absolutely
vital to like like success and
performance in the case of studying it's
about forming studying groups it's about
forming relationships it's even about
communicating your needs and asking for
help because that all falls under
communication
the last thing is mindset
so this is where you know we talk about
this a lot
but generally speaking when i think
about mindset what i what i really think
about is
uh you know things like action
orientation versus outcome orientation
that's all up here so you can do all of
the other stuff right you can
communicate more you can prepare more
you can adapt more but what's in here is
ultimately going to shape all the other
three okay so in the case of mindset
like being able to adapt has a lot to do
with mindset do i understand that like
my identity as a human being is not
determined by certain outcomes so if i
ask 10 women out and they say no does
that mean that i am a reject or i got
rejected by these 10 women so there's a
huge difference there in terms of like
what's your mindset is it egotistical
and what i mean by egotistical is not
like arrogant but
when things happen to you do you
attribute them to like personal
qualities of the self or do you
attribute them to like potentially
external factors so if i ask out 10
girls and like they say no that may have
nothing to do with me one of them may
not be heterosexual one of them may be
in a relationship one of them may not be
looking for a relationship one of them
may have just lost a parent to covid you
know one of them may like
be racist like you never know like
what's going on in the other person's
mind and so your mindset and what you
identify with in terms of like why
things happen to you makes a big
difference
another example of mindset is outcome
orientation versus action orientation so
this is a growth mindset versus
performance mindset which carol dweck
has done a lot of awesome research on
and so the main thing that she sort of
discovered and the yogis discovered this
a couple thousand years earlier is that
like people who devote themselves to
action as opposed to outcomes are the
ones that perform better so when i focus
on studying as opposed to the grade um
you know that actually makes like a big
difference in terms of like what happens
after the test so if i am focusing on
the grade and i'm shooting for an a
and i end up getting a b
if my attitude is okay what can i do
better like how can i grow from this
then it's actually going to boost my
motivation and i'll try twice as hard on
the next test
if i'm focusing on getting an a and i
wind up getting a b it actually tanks my
motivation and then i do half as good on
the next test it sort of dooms me to
getting a b next time so mindset
literally with the same result a
different mindset will lead to an
increase in motivation or a decrease in
motivation
so the other thing in terms of mindset
so for example when you look at
communication mindset matters there too
so there are some people who will form
social connections for like personal
gain and like that's really what's in
their mind oh i need to like form a
study group so that if i get sick people
will be able to give me notes and that's
the kind of thing where like you can do
that but i think other people will pick
it up so why are you socializing you
know what is the nature of your
preparation so even when it comes to
communication like professors are pretty
good at picking up you know who's a
student who's here to just like kiss my
ass and brown knows and who's a student
who's here who's genuinely trying to do
good in the class and is like trying to
learn this subject
and so i've seen this a lot you know
teaching at harvard medical school
because everyone has to do psychiatry
and there are two types of people who
are like tryhards at psychiatric or
three types of people who are tryhards
of psychiatry so type number one is like
genuinely interested in psychiatry and
wants to be a psychiatrist tryhard type
number two is like wants to be an
orthopedic surgeon and needs to get
honors in this rotation so they're going
to try really hard for a grade but
actually don't give a crap about
psychiatry and tryhard 3 is actually my
favorite kind is these are the people
who don't aren't actually interested in
psychiatry like they're not interested
in becoming a psychiatrist but they're
genuinely interested in learning it
because it's like the last opportunity
they'll have to learn psychiatry
those are actually my favorite students
to teach you don't have to like what i
like in order for me to like care about
teaching you all you have to do is like
genuinely be interested in the material
so even the the mindset that you have
will alter your communication right you
have this linguistic cortex you have all
these empathic circuits in the brain and
so all of those things will essentially
act in concert depending on what's on
the inside and if you show up with a
study group and your attitude is hey
like if we all study together we're
going to do better together right we can
all rise together by working together
versus joining a study group out of a
competitive mindset and i'm gunning for
number one and i'm going to use you guys
to help me get to the top
those two mindsets are going to
translate into different kinds of
communication and will result in like
different things because especially like
med school is a good example of
you know half of the people are gunners
like when i went to med school
at the beginning i was a gunner too and
i hated it like it was like not who i
was and i was like screw this like you
know because what happens is there's
like a medical school honor society
right and only the top 10 of students
get into the honor society so i was like
i'm gonna get in the honors society i'm
gonna get in the honors society and then
like it turned me into like a bad person
so i stepped away from it and then the
second year i was like screw that i'm
just gonna like learn medicine like i'm
gonna try to learn medicine forget about
being at the top of my class and then
you know i get an award for academic
achievement at the end of four years
once i change like my mindset
so even mindset can change like all of
the other dimensions we talked about
adaptation and how mindset changes that
we talked about preparation we talked
about communication
um so the next thing that we're going to
do is run through all four of these as a
programmer so the first thing is like
preparation right so depending on how
you learn programming and like what are
your you know avenues of like preparing
to be a programmer that can obviously
adjust how successful you are so for
example if i'm gonna program um
so you know depending on where you train
or like whether you do different kinds
of certification courses or things like
that some programmers will learn like
ancillary stuff so they'll learn stuff
that's a little bit about uh different
from their own field which i think makes
them far more effective programmers so
for example like even if my job isn't ui
ux but i like spend some time learning
about ui ux it'll probably help me like
in my programming because i understand a
little bit about ui ux and will help me
like talk to people who are doing the ui
ux for the back end stuff that i'm i'm
building
other examples are you know a lot of
times like
people are like they're almost like bots
when it comes to like being a programmer
like a lot of people like the difference
that i see between the really good
programmers and like the mediocre
programmers who are still like pretty
successful is like some of them behave
like bots so like i'll work with two
people let's say like just random
company google right and one of the
people at google is like very proactive
about programming they'll like try to
learn different things they'll take like
certification courses things like that
and then another person is sort of like
a bot and what they'll do is they'll
like go to work and they'll nine to five
it and then they'll like kind of do
their job they're smart they're talented
they you know studied cs at stanford so
they're good at it and then they kind of
like leave
and it's not that the other person like
works more hours right so this isn't
like a capitalist like i'm going to take
advantage of of people and try to get
them to work more oftentimes actually
what i find is that the people who are
who don't behave like bots and are
actually thoughtful and spend time like
thinking about the job that they're
doing spend time trying to talk to
different people in the company trying
to talk to like product developers and
things like that um doing different
kinds of certification courses they're
actually the ones who become more
efficient at programming and can work
fewer hours
so preparation can be like kind of you
know twofold either you can prep like a
bot or you can actually be like
thoughtful and stop and think a little
bit about oh like you know how can i
become a better programmer like what are
the different things that i can do to
prepare the good news is that your
bosses will tend to love it because you
will do better but you're not
necessarily doing it for the sake of
your bosses you're doing it so that you
can become a better programmer that's
like a piece of mindset there right
so the second thing is to adapt so this
is a good example of actually something
that i think that programmers are very
good at so this is something where
um
we'll still talk about adaptation but i
think that
programming is one of the few industries
that iteration is like a part of what
you formally learn right and and this is
going to be it's kind of weird because
if you're a programmer like i encourage
you to talk to other people in in
industries and you'll discover that
you're a lot better at iterating than
they are so as a programmer you know
that when you write code they're going
to be bugs right like you know that from
the get-go so programming is one of the
few industries where you write code
there are bugs you're gonna have to
rewrite it you're gonna have to rewrite
it and you're gonna have to rewrite it
and this is where for example if you
compare it to like budding authors
budding authors will write a first draft
or they'll write three chapters and
they'll say
this thing that i'm writing does not fit
the vision of the epic story that i have
in my head so screw it and they walk
away from writing right they go back to
their like programming job and they're
like oh screw this
it's the programmers who understand
iteration and even the authors who
understand iteration that are the
successful authors
there's no such thing as writing a good
book the only thing that you can do is
write a crappy book and then it's
through the process of adding editing
and iteration that you write a good book
and so programming has iteration already
built in but this is where when i work
with programmers what i'll have them do
is iterate on things besides code right
so this is where like you can still
iterate on things like work life balance
so you know how can you maintain
work-life balance
um you know google is another good
example of you know they provide meals
and things like that and like some
people that i've worked with at google
have like d gen sleep schedules and
circadian rhythm problems and like
google sort of doesn't care right let's
just like you have to write the code by
the time that the deadline is there and
what i really found is that you know
working with with um some programmers
who like
are able to iterate on a good schedule
and healthy work-life balance and the
fact that like they're not famished at
two in the morning because they started
work at 10 p.m
and then they're like ordering uber eats
and then they feel like sluggish or
whatever and they're eating crap and
then they're like exhausted and it's
like this cycle of like just like
unproductive stuff
and then they end up drinking tons of
red bull and like hammering it out
towards the end and since they're
brilliant
the code is pretty good and like they
end up sticking at google
but on the flip side they're the people
who are who are like really really good
at iterating even like personal life
stuff or even iterating communication so
i've worked uh with some uh you know
clients that are at some of these
companies where
you don't even have a job description
right so these are some like the open
work kind of companies like valve is an
example of this kind of company
where like you can kind of work on what
you want to work on and you know your
performance review is essentially like
some kind of like peer review
and so when you're at i actually don't
know if that's precisely what valve does
i don't know their internal processes
but i've worked at i've had clients who
work at spaces like that and a lot of
programming is turning into that kind of
stuff
and so if you kind of think about you
know how you get promoted how you get
raises it's not just based on the
quality of your work what you actually
have to adapt is like your interpersonal
skills and social skills because part of
your raises and benefits and uh and i
could tell stories and stories and
stories about the internal workings of
these companies i've also worked with
executives who are at these kinds of
companies and have this kind of
philosophy so unfortunately like getting
a raise at some of these kinds of
companies is like half work product and
a half popularity contest
and so this is where if you want to
adapt right there's two kinds of people
that i work with one is like oh it's
unfair because this person is
charismatic so they got more of a raise
than i did like sucks like i like it's
unfair
and then there are the people who are
like oh this is a place where i need to
learn social skills so let me adapt and
like learn how to play this game a
little bit let me learn how to be a
little bit more political
and then they're the ones whose
performance improves
it's unfortunate that this is the way
the world is i wish it was different
but unfortunately it's the way it is
right so now we can i kind of already
segued to communication
um but the truth is that if you want to
perform
in a programming team or
you know
anything else you need to learn how to
be a good communicator so this is also
where like if you think about sprints
right so like a lot of these agile
models for like programming involve
sprints where people are get in a room
and they sort of like sit down and
they'll like maybe whiteboard things out
or things like that but one of the
biggest yields i've seen working with
programmers is actually training them in
communication skills because then what
happens is like at the end of like the
first sprint meeting or whatever like
everyone understands like what they're
supposed to be doing and when everyone
is kind of on the same page the
programming goes much more smoothly and
not being on the same page involves
things like like you know not laying out
your argument clear enough not asking
questions not asking other people if
they understand so communication is a
huge part of this
so i really do think that like
communication is like very important for
programmers and what you'll find is that
like you know who ends up being the cto
the cto like if we take let's say take
five programmers who winds up being cto
it's not the person who's the best
programmer it's the person who can
communicate
with
the ceo the coo and the cfo right so
like this is really really important if
you want to be a successful cto you need
to practice communication skills because
this is what's going to happen your ceo
is going to come to you and they're
going to say hey we want this feature i
want to add a button
right because they've got this idea and
then like because they don't understand
anything about programming you as a cto
are going to be like
okay it'll take us six months because
you've already learned to say we can't
do that or you've learned that it's
wrong to say we can't do that well the
truth is you can't do that it's requires
some weird back-end architect
architecture stuff that you have to like
do from scratch
right because the ceo saw some of one of
your competitors that has an app that
added this feature and they're like oh
that's a cool feature like we should
just add just add the feature yo
and you're like
so the there's the worst ceo who says we
can't do that
then there's like this the second level
like one level up from that
is
uh the the ct sorry cto who says
um
okay that'll cost us like six months and
like five hundred thousand dollars
and then the cfo gets pissed at you and
they're like we can't afford that like
you need to do it with 250 000
and then the ceo is like you need to do
it in three months and so then they're
kind of pissed at you
and then one level above that is like
the cto who can smooth over those things
and kind of like massage them into like
helping you understand okay you do need
a bigger budget here's why things like
that and then the highest level of cto
is the one who when the ceo comes in and
says i want to add this button is able
to say we can't do that and the ceo
actually respects your opinion and
doesn't get pissed at you and listens to
you
so like at the bottom in the top you're
saying the same damn thing it's just one
of you in one situation you actually
know how to say that right and these are
like this is like when i work with ctos
i'll teach them the skills that i learn
as a psychiatrist talking to a suicidal
patient right and like you can tell
someone who's suicidal hey bro you can't
do that it's
that may not work it's about how you
explain to them how to bring them to
your point of view
that's really really important
so communication is vital in programming
and is like so underdeveloped in the
field that it's it's really sad
and then so the last thing is mindset
and this is where you know
this is where things honestly fall apart
a little bit for me
because i want to say that like
the best programmers that i've worked
with actually are like have this weird
kind of mindset
of like cynicism
and like a defeatist attitude but
perseverance
so there's something i'd say that the
the best mindset to have as a programmer
is like one where you know things are
gonna be screwed but you're gonna yolo
it
right and if you're in programming like
you know like it's hard like this is
where i've made observations and i don't
quite understand it to be honest chat
but they're like some programmers who
are like yeah let's just yolo it and
something about that attitude
is like it actually leads to like the
best products i don't understand it i
really don't and this is where you know
i wish i could say like you could talk
about action orientation or outcome
orientation or things like that
it may have something to do with that
but i think that there's there's
something about you know programmers who
say this is hard and maybe it's just
like it kind of goes back to like what
we were saying about uh students but
there's some programmers who are saying
this is hard and then they and
whine and like going into it they have
something like the nocebo effect which
is when you believe that a medication
isn't gonna work it somehow doesn't work
and so it's the opposite of a placebo
and so there are some programmers who go
in kind of thinking like hey this is
going to fail it's never going to work
and so like they're mauling on the
inside and then maybe molding in real
life and they're like grumps and people
don't enjoy working with them and
they're kind of annoying and then like
it sort of doesn't work out and then
there's another kind of programmer who's
got a slightly different mindset which
is like let's yolo it like this is
doomed for failure but let's see what we
can do let's try it anyway and not only
does that attitude change
to change the communication
but it also like they just do better
this is one of the areas where frankly i
probably need to do like a little bit
more research but you know i've done a
lot of mindset work with programmers and
i don't know
how exactly i've done it but it seems to
work
so some of it is is also helping them
understand that you know your success as
a programmer has a lot more to do with
like because some of them will be like
hopeless right you're one of these cogs
in the wheel the ceo doesn't understand
what's going on the cto is like riding
your ass the project manager is an
and plays favorites they're all
these kinds of attitudes that people
have when they go to work and like if
that's the attitude that you've got when
you go to go to work it becomes a
self-fulfilling prophecy
if you think that the cto the the
project manager is playing favorites
like
then what happens is like if as long as
you hold that attitude in your head when
you make a mistake like you're not going
to think about the mistake you made
you're not going to try to get better
when you make a mistake and some product
messes up
you're going to blame the other guy and
say that like oh they're just blaming
you it's not because i did anything
wrong it's because this the project
manager is playing favorites and so
you're never going to realize like what
you're actually doing wrong and you're
never going to actually improve and so
it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy
where then the project manager starts to
dislike you
because instead of taking constructive
feedback and trying to fix things you
just mauled on the inside and like go
afk
so mindset's very important for
programmers
questions
you